Adapted `client-server.md` from ABCI directory (#8510)
tendermint/tendermint: spec/abci++/abci++_client_server_002_draft.md

---
order: 5
title: Client and Server
---

# Client and Server

This section is for those looking to implement their own ABCI Server, perhaps in
a new programming language.

You are expected to have read all previous sections of ABCI++ specification, namely
[Basic Concepts](./abci%2B%2B_basic_concepts_002_draft.md),
[Methods](./abci%2B%2B_methods_002_draft.md),
[Application Requirements](./abci%2B%2B_app_requirements_002_draft.md), and
[Expected Behavior](./abci%2B%2B_tmint_expected_behavior_002_draft.md).

## Message Protocol and Synchrony

The message protocol consists of pairs of requests and responses defined in the
[protobuf file](../../proto/tendermint/abci/types.proto).

Some messages have no fields, while others may include byte-arrays, strings, integers,
or custom protobuf types.

For more details on protobuf, see the [documentation](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview).

As of v0.36 requests are synchronous. For each of ABCI++'s four connections (see
[Connections](./abci%2B%2B_app_requirements_002_draft.md)), when Tendermint issues a request to the

> Application, it will wait for the response before continuing execution. As a side effect,

Reviewer: this is more clear without this change (the "its" is ambiguously either tendermint or the application)

> requests and responses are ordered for each connection, but not necessarily across connections.

Author: Well, the "but not necessarily across connections" is what makes the whole thing worth saying.

## Server Implementations

To use ABCI in your programming language of choice, there must be an ABCI
server in that language. Tendermint supports four implementations of the ABCI server:

> - in Tendermint's repository:

Reviewer: I'd only put this on line 38, abci socket and gRPC aren't go specific.

    - In-process
    - ABCI-socket
    - GRPC

> - [tendermint-rs](https://github.com/informalsystems/tendermint-rs)

Reviewer: should probably list tower-abci here

Author: done

The implementations in Tendermint's repository can be tested using `abci-cli` by setting
the `--abci` flag appropriately.

See examples, in various stages of maintenance, in
[Go](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/tree/master/abci/server),
[JavaScript](https://github.com/tendermint/js-abci),
[C++](https://github.com/mdyring/cpp-tmsp), and
[Java](https://github.com/jTendermint/jabci).

### In Process

The simplest implementation uses function calls within Golang.

> This means ABCI applications written in Golang can be compiled with Tendermint Core and run as a single binary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that ABCI applications written in Golang can be compiled together with Tendermint Core and run as a single binary.
```

Reviewer 2: You mean here that a single binary will run both Tendermint and the ABCI application?

Author: "that" is grammatically optional there.

> You mean here that a single binary will run both Tendermint and the ABCI application?

Yes. I'll replace by "linked", which is more precise I think

### GRPC

> If GRPC is available in your language, this is the easiest approach,

Reviewer 2: Add the link of documentation here, in the first use of GPRC.

Author: Yep

> though it will have significant performance overhead.

Reviewer 2: Why is it "easier" than the in-process version? Regarding the overhead, the message is that this option is the one with the more relevant one?

Reviewer: I think the caveat that it's easier (because of the existing tooling), than abci-socket, but not easier than in-process for go.

Author: Here, by "your language" of course we mean other than Go 😄... I think I'll add something to clear it up. So in-process doesn't apply here.
I think it's easier than the socket (I'm kind of guessing, as I didn't author this text in the first place) because you don't need to define an ad-hoc wire protocol like TSP (see next section).
And also the tooling available, as @tychoish pointed out
As for the overhead, I think its encoding is heavier weight than the socket-based in the way to encode requests and replies, but I'm not sure about this.

> To get started with GRPC, copy in the [protobuf

Reviewer: I think we should omit this paragraph. There's no need for us to document how to use grpc in the specification (and arguably at all.)

Author: That's a good point indeed.
I will nevertheless keep a sentence referring the reader to the GRPC doc

file](../../proto/tendermint/abci/types.proto) and compile it using the GRPC
plugin for your language. For instance, for Golang, the command is `protoc
--go_out=plugins=grpc:. types.proto`.  See the [grpc documentation](http://www.grpc.io/docs/)
for more details.  `protoc` will autogenerate all the

> necessary code for ABCI client and server in your language, including whatever

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: including all the interfaces that your application must implement for being ABCI-compilant?

Author: Removed the paragraph

interface your application must satisfy to be used by the ABCI server for
handling requests.

> Note the length-prefixing used in the socket implementation (TSP) does not apply for GRPC.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this comment from here, but reinforce it in the section below.

Author: Done

Author: Actually, there was already a sentence there, so merged both

> ### TSP

Reviewer: I would avoid using "tendermint socket protocol" as a term of art, as we don't really use it outside of this spec, and it's not a great term.

Author: OK, reworded to avoid using this term

> Tendermint Socket Protocol is an asynchronous, raw socket server which provides ordered message passing over unix or tcp.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tendermint Socket Protocol (TSP) is an asynchronous, raw socket server which provides ordered message passing over unix or tcp.
```

Author: Removed the term

> Messages are serialized using Protobuf3 and length-prefixed with a [signed Varint](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/encoding?csw=1#signed-integers)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Messages are serialized using Protobuf3 and length-prefixed with a [signed Varint](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/encoding?csw=1#signed-integers).
```

> If GRPC is not available in your language, or you require higher

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If GRPC is not available in your language, your application requires higher
```

> performance, or otherwise enjoy programming, you may implement your own

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performance, or you otherwise enjoy programming, you may implement your own
```

Author: no need

> ABCI server using the Tendermint Socket Protocol. The first step is still to auto-generate the relevant data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ABCI server using TSP. The first step is to auto-generate the relevant data
```

Author: I've removed the term

types and codec in your language using `protoc`. In addition to being proto3 encoded, messages coming over

> the socket are length-prefixed to facilitate use as a streaming protocol. proto3 doesn't have an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the socket are length-prefixed to facilitate its use as a streaming protocol. proto3 doesn't have an
```

Author: I just deleted that part, as I realize it's not clear at all, and not adding much

official length-prefix standard, so we use our own. The first byte in
the prefix represents the length of the Big Endian encoded length. The
remaining bytes in the prefix are the Big Endian encoded length.

> For example, if the proto3 encoded ABCI message is 0xDEADBEEF (4

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if the proto3 encoded ABCI message is `0xDEADBEEF` (4
```

> bytes), the length-prefixed message is 0x0104DEADBEEF. If the proto3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bytes long), the length-prefixed message is `0x0104DEADBEEF` (`01` byte for encoding the length `04` of the message). If the proto3
```

encoded ABCI message is 65535 bytes long, the length-prefixed message
would start with 0x02FFFF.

> The benefit of using this `varint` encoding over the old version (where integers were encoded as `<len of len><big endian len>` is that

Reviewer 2: Old here means before v0.36?

Author: No idea 😐

Author: I'll remove this

it is the standard way to encode integers in Protobuf. It is also generally shorter.

As noted above, this prefixing does not apply for GRPC.

> An ABCI server must also be able to support multiple connections, as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that your ABCI server must be able to support multiple connections, as
```

Tendermint uses four connections.

## Client

> There are currently two use-cases for an ABCI client. One is a testing

Reviewer 2: So, Tendermint Core is the ABCI client for your application, but you might want to test its operation "offline" by using the `abci-cli` testing tool?

Author: That's my understanding

Author: I'll clarify

Author: I totally reworked this part

tool, as in the `abci-cli`, which allows ABCI requests to be sent via
command line. The other is a consensus engine, such as Tendermint Core,
which makes requests to the application every time a new transaction is
received or a block is committed.

It is unlikely that you will need to implement a client. For details of
our client, see

> [here](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/tree/master/abci/client).

Reviewer 2: Which client is this? The one used by `abci-cli`, by the Core of both?

Author: It points to the boilerplate we have to route ABCI request to the Application, depending the the server type (in-process, GRPC, socket).
I've removed this paragraph.
